Watching a great violinist.. if it were possible to replicate all those movements in a machine.. what could you do with that?  It seems we have ever growing granularity in being able to model real time events.

So, would a machine playing Chaconne with identical movements to Heifetz sound the same, or different?  And could we predict or change the movements to do something different?  Would it be possible to program certain emotive elements into the play, or transcrive the music, use Markov chains for predictive modeling and create new intepretations for certain things? http://doubtingtommaso.blogspot.com/2008/03/markov-chains.html

How far could this be extended?  For instance.. lets say you do the same thing for a soccer player taking a free kick.  A really good player would only make one in the occasional set of free kicks.  But a computer is infinitely more precise in it's calculation.  If it had this method for understanding what is needed given a situation, would it be more or less accurate than a human in a new situation?

And is this really any different than what we would do.  If the machine were more or less skilled at something like this, would it really say anything dramatic about what we do when we learn?  Aren't we really (in some sense) simply repeating what we see until we understand it sufficiently to apply it to new situations?  Isn't this what we really mean when we say someone has genius - that they are abel to apply old concepts into new situations rapidly.  They don't have to learn something, they can simply move along  and come to firm grips wih the new problem.   What would it mean if a machine could really do this as well?

There's a short answer here.  I'm not sure it really can.  The answer lies in the difference between a continuous function and a discrete function.  Or rather, the integers and the reals.  You may have heard of the infinite monkey theorem.  Certain arts, and I would include drawing and music among these, don't map to something that has a discrete sample space.  Consider first a 2 dimensional plane.  The plane has infinite points for which an artist may choose from as they draw lines.  Suddenly those 8 0r 10 lines that Da Vinci required for a simple drawing seem more unreachable.  When you have litereally an infinite number of points to choose from, and an infinite number of strokes that might connect each series of points, how can you possibly choose from them?  Of course, the problem doesn't really map this way, not in our universe, but you get the idea.  It's still a lot different from the 26 character sample space the monkey has (or 36, or whatever).

Now in three dimensions, any machine simulating the movements of a performance artist is going to be sampling.  They may be sampling at a very high rate, say 1000 times per second, but when the entire movement is enticing the vibration of 4 strings at anywhere from 500 Hz to 15kHz (get numbers), i don't really think that level of sampling will be sufficient.  In fact, it may not ever be.  I think the question devolves to how close one can get, rather than whether its an actual simulation.  How diffeent are these questions?

More questions, could a machine like this with some algorithms to perform small variations in the playing come up with some "perfect" performance?  Would we be able to tell?