"Meta" is a delightful little prefix, especially for computer scientists.  It's the only recursive unit of language I can think of, even if it only has two steps.  Metacognition is thinking about thinking, metaprogramming is programming that writes programs, and metadata is data about data.

I've been thinking lately about metadata.  In the Internet age, this is a common word to describe data describing data.  But offline, you don't hear a terrible amount about it directly.  I was reading a blog called the 4-hour work week about the eponymous book.  It's most popular post described the author's preferred times for producing creative output.  I have no idea what triggered the examination, but something made me ask, do I actually want to write?  Or am I simply enamoured with the idea of being a writer?  Any sort of passionate idea can have the same attribution.  I don't often know what to think of my faith, but I know I want to be of the faithful.   I sometimes consider the idea of a beautiful woman at my side rather than the woman herself.

I don't know if this is some warped sense of a Platonic ideal, but it seems to be motivated by selfishness - or rather insecurity.  Metadata, on any given subject, seems to have the same destabilizing effect: to see points about the data is not necessarily the same as seeing or understanding the data itself.  It's important to note the difference here between metadata and any sort of trend analysis or other statistical quantification.  We're considering single ideas here (and their metadata), not groups of them.

Back to bucket theory (which is the idea that the reason human thought is expanding so rapidly is because of the myriad types of buckets available to put a given thought in.. something else I've been thinking about).  Let's say I have an idea, or a meme, or whatever you like.  In order to disseminate it, this idea needs a container, a bucket.  In the past, there were a finite number of types of containers..  books, journals, perhaps movies, etc.  Now there are infinite types of varied shapes, colors, and media. There are more ideas too, filling all these buckets and fighting for the same audience.  A brilliant economist (I think Friedman) said that a wealth of information creates a poverty of attention.  A corollary of this is that the same wealth of information is devaluing a single unit of information.

Metadata, perhaps, is what feels so dehumanizing about the Internet.  Who I am or what I say is not nearly as important as my metadata.  The more friends on Myspace, the better I am.  If my blog has more links, or its wrapper is more creative, the content is clearly more valuable.  In our day, the real world effects are expanding as well, although they aren't entirely new.  I am my credit score, my loan history, my passport, my ebay seller rating.  So who am I?  What value do these things have?  Do they directly correspond to the question of who I am, or do they serve some other purpose?

I certainly can't see any, except when dealing with a plenitude of people, they make tasks more manageable.  They have two very distinct downsides however.  The first is an easy gradient of power.  Power is a very old concept and the real practice of it, politics, is the second oldest profession in the world.  Now though, everyone has the opportunity to participate in some particular dimension.  Democratization is what this process is often called, and the popular opinion, the opinion of those disseminating a lot of the metadata in the first place, is that it's a positive movement.  I have my doubts.

In addition to the vast new consumption of power, virtual or otherwise, comes the far more insidious danger: one's actions, one's ideas, one's dreams become normalized into metadata.  Perhaps sterilized would be a more appropriate.  It becomes impossible to separate the sin from the sinner, and it becomes far more frequent to eschew personal modesty and replace it with feelings of pride.  Grace, or any chance of it, becomes sterile.  If all I can be aware of is a mistake and not the person, I cannot have any sense of humanity.   Conversely, and perhaps more importantly, if I see only the brilliance and not the person, I cannot have any sense of divinity, and I am in danger of losing my sense of wonder.